In the public mind, the First World War is
often seen as narrow-minded or stubborn officers
sending wave after wave of men to die going
over the top from the trenches.
In reality, the war saw the nations fighting
it undergo the most profound and radical military
revolution I their histories.
We’ve looked at several of these so far,
and today I’m to look at France.
I’m Indy Neidell; welcome to a Great War
special episode about the evolution of French
infantry doctrine during the First World War.
To look at that, though, you really have to
go back to France’s defeat in the Franco-Prussian
War in 1871.
French leadership saw the defeat as an intellectual
one.
The Prussian High Command had given its officers
a greater sense of purpose and tactical flexibility,
and that army overwhelmed a French one that
was not only underprepared, but had no clarity
of objectives or united leadership.
The Third French Republic completely overhauled
the military, and after 9 years of reforms
the French War Academy was founded.
Garrison libraries were instituted in 1871
to promote intellectualism and initiative;
there would be 200 by 1914.
Soon, each branch of service had a monthly
magazine.
Officers of all ranks were expected to hold
conferences and write essays.
The mobilization that had been chaotic became
thoroughly planned and the railway networks
that had been poorly exploited were expanded
and fully integrated.
But the French leadership overemphasized what
it saw as its flaws or the enemy’s virtues.
The defensive stance, the passivity, and the
belief in superior equipment of 1870 became anathema.
Even the adoption of the Lebel smokeless rifle
in 1886 that guaranteed accurate and lethal
fire on an individual level did not shake
off the anti-materialism of the new generation
of graduated officers.
The concept of leadership capable of leading
the troops to victory by superior morale became
widespread, and the solution to the lethality
of the modern battlefield was simply French
élan.
Now, the German military did not share this
anti-materialism, having drawn the correct
lessons from 1870-71.
The British and the Russians had, by 1914,
benefitted from the lessons of the Boer Wars
the Russo-Japanese War.
France of course took away lessons as well,
particular those of artillery and concealment,
but the lack of practical experience and centralized
leadership delayed implementation.
By 1914, Germany had a huge advantage over
France in artillery and machine guns, and
also in manpower, having outgrown France enormously
over the past three decades.
To French Commander Joseph Joffre, training
always toward offense was the answer, which
is sort of the opposite of the trench war
that was coming.
“It is not in the excess of cautiousness
that we must search safety; but rather in
the disposition of our troops in a way that
always guarantee our combat readiness.
The real defense of a marching column lies
in its ability to launch an immediate counter
attack...”
While this understanding of modern war is
erroneous, it does contradict the idea that
France entered the war without a doctrine
that was- in its context- coherent.
The first hostilities of 1914 quickly revealed
the flaws of the system.
On August 14th for example, near Plaine, repeated
bayonet frontal assaults were shattered by
German machine guns and artillery, while the
same day, two batteries of 75mm field guns
disregarded the rules and made a joint action
with the infantry- a fixation barrage with
outflanking movements- that forced a German
withdrawal.
For the rest of 1914, the French Army was
forced to hugely adapt and evolve.
Over 40% of the commanders of large units
were removed for incompetence or insufficiency
during this time, and already in August, GHQ
issued notes based on battle reports:
Conquered territory must be manned and defended
with artillery to prevent counter attacks
The enemy must first be engaged with skirmishers
and artillery before the main assault
The infantry must wait for artillery support,
do not let the troops needlessly expose themselves
There were more, and in early September new
instructions were issued about building trenches.
However, even though French leadership had
now realized that firepower kills, assimilating
this was a work-in-progress and it was tough
to overcome the damage done by prewar military
education.
General Fayolle wrote in January 1915, “I’m
having a lot of difficulties trying to organize
the construction of trenches by the troops...
my men are more interested in dying than working.”
He wrote in December that year, “The truth
is that nobody was prepared for this war of
positions... we all had the greatest disdain
for fortifications and entrenching works.
Our whole education has to be reworked...
War cannot be improvised.”
The Northeastern part of the country was occupied,
and France had lost 60% of its coal and iron
mines, so 1915 was a year of frantic reforms
aimed at replenishing worn out artillery,
depleted ammunitions stores, and the nation’s
crippled heavy industry.
Still, Joffre launched two major offensives
to draw German divisions away from Russia
and to experiment with new ways of using artillery.
They really also tried to teach the lessons
of 1914- wounded veterans replaced military
instructors and dedicated instruction centers
were created.
The offensives were really the swan song-
with a few exceptions- of the old style of
leadership since the expected breakthroughs
never came.
Fayolle again, “Our magnificent infantry
was broken by barbed wires and entrenched
artillery.
Our soldiers demand new combat methods and
more combat weaponry.”
But new armament programs, organizational
reforms, and troop instruction took time,
and it was only in late 1915 and 1916 that
the French army was again really innovating.
That period saw all sorts of material upgrades,
from the Adrian Helmet to the Chauchat light
machine gun, grenade launchers, and even the
wheeled field kitchen.
The French leadership devised new doctrines
for methodical battle, with cooperation between
infantry and artillery, and the primacy of
material over men.
The shackles of 1871 had finally been broken,
and the dramatic increase of firepower at
the divisional level and enthusiasm for experimentation
would be instrumental in turning the tide
at the Battle of Verdun.
Local superiority in material, a rolling artillery
barrage, and a thoroughly trained and equipped
infantry would propel Robert Nivelle from
success at Verdun all the way to Chief of
Staff, replacing Joffre in December 1916.
He began the modernization process that would
ultimately lead to the creation of the modern
French army, but though the men were trained
to fight within a system, and the branches
coordinated actions, his strategy was flawed,
as the speed of the infantry was subordinated
to the artillery, which could only keep up
as preparations allowed.
So when Nivelle attacked on a large front
with unlimited objectives, especially against
the new German defenses the Hindenburg Line,
it was a catastrophe, made worse by Nivelle’s
refusal to call it off for weeks.
So Nivelle was out and Philippe Petain was
in.
Finally a true convinced modernist who had
been in favor of modern methods since well
before the war.
He implemented a second rearmament program
to give the army Renault FT tanks, infantry
trucks, more planes, but more importantly,
the logistical means to properly exploit a
breakthrough of the German elastic defenses
once the critical mass of material required
had been secured.
Two conditions were necessary to bring about
a war of movement in the Allies favor; guaranteed
local superiority in both firepower and manpower
and the motorization of the infantry and artillery
to keep the initiative during exploitation
before German reinforcements could arrive
by rail.
This methodology worked well in limited offensives
like the Second Battle of Verdun and the Battle
of Malmaison, and really, for the first time
in the war, the French Army was truly playing
in the same league as its adversary.
They now understood both German defense in
depth and infiltration tactics.
However, the disaster that hit the Italians
at Caporetto and Russia leaving the war forced
the Entente to concede initiative to the Central
Powers, and as 1918 began they prepared for
the inevitable onslaught.
If they could withstand the storm long enough
for the French armament program and the arriving
American troops to give them their two conditions,
they could win a war of movement through logistical
superiority.
Germany relied increasingly on shock troops.
Petain and Ferdinand Foch thought this indicated
a lack of confidence in the regular infantry,
whether or not true.
French High Command debated something similar,
but decided instead to further the integration
of different branches into a coherent, interarm
fighting force and the French Modern Infantry
was born.
Still, the first half of 1918 would see the
army reel under German attacks; I mean, it’s
difficult to unlearn three years of offensive
trench warfare, but you could see- the 4th
army of General Gouraud, that diligently applied
Petain’s directives, held its ground, and
by the summer, the troops embraced battle
proven concepts.
Let’s see...
Mangin’s counter attack at Matz June 11th,
for example, supported by masses of tanks
and planes, just lay waste to the German advance.
Massive motorization and extensive and well-maintained
roads allowed France strategic deployment
that Germany just could not keep up with.
In fact, German Quartermaster General Erich
Ludendorff claimed, “The Entente victory
of 1918 is the triumph of French trucks over
the German railway”.
By August 1918, after four years of bloody
war, the French Army was the most modern fighting
force in the world, with a highly motorized
infantry, supported by 2,300 tanks, 3,800
planes, and over 10,000 artillery pieces.
1914 had been completely reversed and the
victories of 1918 were performed by Allied
troops sharing a cohesive training and a logistical organization.